uh
so i'm here today to talk to folks about
ipld
and um what we've done with this
historically
uh what we're doing with it now and what
we're going to do with it in the future
because we've made a ton of
progress in ipld the first time you
might have heard of ipld could have been
several years ago already
it's a project that comes out of ipfs
the shared prefix ip is not a
coincidence
and we've really grown the project a lot
from its earliest beginnings as this
thing that came out of ipfs so i'm going
to talk a lot about that
transition a quick recap
ipld stands for interplanetary linked
data
and it did grow out of ipfs and our goal
with this
is when we started building ipfs
we were building this thing to make
files
shareable in a decentralized like spread
around the world sort of way
and some of the lessons that we learned
while we were doing that is
my ui is giving us black boxes all over
can i make
zoom not show zoom overlays
is that better hopefully nothing
important shows up in that part of the
screen
okay sorry the goal of ipld is to make
specs
and libraries that make it easier to
develop
interoperable decentralized applications
so taking lessons we learned in ipfs and
trying to generalize them and make them
available to more people to use to build
their own
cool stuff so
a million years ago ipfs was just just
this thing that stores files and makes
them globally available which is really
cool and really hard
but it was just for files so
the first step of generalizing this was
ipld started as being this thing called
dag pb which is short for directed
acyclic graph
based on protobufs which was a way
to describe large blobs of binary data
and linked together into tree structures
and
and so go from there and be able to
address those tree structures in this
globally content addressable way
but it's really only good at that point
for
addressing blobs of binary data and
maybe
application developers might want to do
more than that so
this is the big dawning moment for what
ipld is really going to let us do
ipld is nowadays about structured data
so by this i mean something that's like
probably vaguely recognizable is pretty
similar to json
a dynamic format which you can use to
store any data you want
in a structured useful way that you can
build applications around
so specifically when i talk about
structured data and this data model in
ipld
we're going to have concepts like list
and map
very familiar right concepts you
probably want when building your
application data structure
the data model knows what strings and
integers are booleans all of these
common things
null is in there and slightly more than
json
we also have the ability to talk about
binary byte sequences big large blobs
and links by which i mean the cid
structure that you're probably familiar
with from ipfs already
so with this general data model concept
ipld is no longer just about file
systems and opaque blobs it's about
structured data
this is something that we hope people
can use to build their own application
logic
and we hope that we can give people ipld
libraries which can traverse
this structure and do stuff with it
you can think of this as kind of like an
ast an abstract syntax tree
but it's kind of without the s because
this is kodak agnostic
there's no single syntax of serialized
data that you need to worry about
the ipld data model can actually be
connected to
dagpb like we talked about earlier or
plain old json
or other formats like seaboard and
really any codec that you can imagine
can be plugged into this data model
we even have bridges to other content
addressable systems like
bitcoin ethereum and really awesomely
git
as long as it has a hash we can link to
it
and as long as we can define a
transformation from that serial data
into our data model we can traverse it
and do
stuff with it so
what kind of stuff lots of stuff
the most common thing is just to have a
library which can traverse these data
structures programmatically
that's cool we've also built higher
level features on top of this
for example something called selectors
which is a
declarative model for making traversals
happen i'll get to that more later
some features called advanced layout
schemas these will all have more slides
but in general
what can you do with the data model
build applications
that are based on structured data and
want to be decentralized
so first cool feature an example of a
thing that we can build now that ipld
has the data model
is something that we call ipld selectors
selectors are a machinery for
declaratively specifying a way you want
to walk
over another tree of data and the
selector is evaluated
doing that walk and selecting any data
that matches
these can be created themselves with
declarative documents that are still
just ipld structures so you can draft
them in json and it's just fine
and these are something that are built
for a limited power of expressiveness
which is useful because you can actually
evaluate these selectors in a very low
trust environment
one of the purposes of selectors is you
can draft one of these up
send it to some other computer in a
network and
ask them to evaluate the selection for
you
they could then stream back data that
matches and you could evaluate the
selector yourself as well
since these are non-trained complete and
have limited power you can do this in a
relatively safe way even when you don't
necessarily trust the person sending you
queries
which is kind of cool we're using
features like this to develop
new data transports like graphsync
i'm already running out of time and i
have eight million more things to talk
about so i'm gonna go real fast
we have a concept called adls this is
short for advanced data layouts
long story short sharding is now a
feature of ipld
you can implement your own plugins for
how you want to shard data
and make it appear as data model nodes
so like the same maps and lists
and this lets us have transparent
pathing even over really large started
data structures
this is something that ipfs web gateways
have had for unix of sp1
now we've generalized and made it into
something that you can use in
applications with your own special logic
selectors work over this it's kind of
cool
we also for when we want to supercharge
our own development
and skip over a bunch of manual data
validation
we've implemented a schema system
ipod now has a schema language you can
use the schema language to define
types that have semantic behaviors
structs and
sometimes unions enums things like this
that you're probably familiar with from
other type systems you've used as a
programmer
and combined with this type
specification in the ipld schema
language you can
associate a representation clause with
this type clause
this describes how this information
should be transformed in and out of the
data model
and thus how individual codecs should
proceed to represent it
by making these things separately
tunable we believe
you might have some really cool features
in your future
types also have a data model interface
themselves
meaning you can still run selectors
traversals and write other generic code
against data that's processed
with schemes you can use these any place
you would use
any other schema language the coolest
thing about these we feel
is that schemas are optional they're
this thing that builds upon
the ipld data model but they're not
strictly necessary
now what's cool about this is it means
you can use the schema system
for feature detection if you have a
document which
in the data model or say this is written
in json for clarity
you have a list and it just contains the
number one and the number two
you can match this against a schema that
has some named type that's a list of
integers
clearly this matches you could also
match it against a schema saying it's a
struct
with two fields and a representation of
tuple mode
so in general you can use this kind of
feature to
structurally match on data and add types
without having to embed the schema in
the document
and without necessarily having to make
the document unreadable without the
schema
you can also use multiple schemas to
attempt to match the same data
and use this to construct feature
detection we're very hopeful that this
will let people build decentralized
applications
in a flexible evolvable way that may
never have been possible before
we've also got a bunch of really cool
new tooling which has come out to this
recently
we have syntax highlighters courtesy of
one of my fine colleagues
we have cogen systems which are
appearing in going these are in early
alpha but if you want to try it
it's pretty cool come try it
we have schema auto derivers
this is something that is actually so
cool i barely understand it this is
again coming from a fine colleague named
rod
something that's cool with this optional
schema system is
you can take data that has no schema
previously associated with it
and still infer a structural type which
describes it
so people have been able to build tools
that do this automatically this gif
animating over on the side is such a
tool
taking a look at a large dump of data
from the filecoin network
and automatically inferring schemas for
it
this is kind of cool i can't wait
honestly to see what people do with this
we even the list just goes on and on
have bridges to graphql
why not another colleague has
built this system which is a mostly
one-way bridge from ipld schemas to
graphql
ipl these schemas are somewhat more
expressive than graphql so
there are some interesting details to
mine with this but
it is letting us write ipld schemas
and use graphql visualization tools
as well as submit graphql queries
against apis which then transform that
data into ipld queries and
do the thing this
this is just so cool
long story short come build applications
with ipld
cool stuff is happening over here and
i'll leave you with a bunch of links
if you want to know more there are specs
repos where i think probably most of our
interesting development goes on
there's also docs websites here the
development team
on ipld hangs out in irc this is also a
bridge to matrix if you're a fan of that
sort of thing
and if you want to bug me elsewhere on
the interwebs at warp fork is
usually my handle find somebody with
that name it's probably me
maybe it's the internet i don't know
good luck